SMART MAIL MANAGER
INTERVIEW PREPARATION GUIDE
===========================

Purpose of this document
------------------------
This guide explains the current Smart Mail Manager project from an interview
perspective. It covers what the code currently does, the concepts behind it,
how to describe the design, likely interview questions, limitations, and the
next engineering steps.

The most important accuracy point is this: the repository currently contains a
working Gmail authentication, retrieval, MIME parsing, and text-cleaning
foundation. The database layer, feature extraction layer, model layer, and
automatic classification workflow are not implemented yet. In an interview,
describe those as planned extensions rather than completed features.


1. Project summary
------------------
Smart Mail Manager is a Python application that connects to Gmail, retrieves
recent messages, converts Gmail's nested API representation into a simpler
email record, and prepares email content for future machine-learning-based
classification or organization.

Current end-to-end flow:

    credentials.json / token.json
            |
            v
        auth.py
            |
            v
    gmail_client.py  ---> authenticated Gmail API service
            |
            v
        gmail_service.py
            |
            v
    raw Gmail message
            |
            v
        ml/parser.py
            |
            v
    normalized email dictionary
            |
            v
        ml/cleaner.py
            |
            v
    cleaned text and sender features

The current executable demonstration is src/main.py. It authenticates with
Gmail, lists up to ten recent messages, retrieves each full message, and prints
its subject.


2. Repository structure
----------------------
.
|-- credentials.json       Google OAuth client configuration; secret material
|-- token.json             User OAuth token; generated and sensitive
|-- requirements.txt       Pinned Python dependencies
|-- data/                  Reserved for application data or model artifacts
|-- src/
    |-- auth.py            OAuth credential loading, refresh, and first login
    |-- gmail_client.py    Construction of the Gmail API client
    |-- gmail_service.py   Small service wrapper around Gmail operations
    |-- main.py            Current command-line entry point
    |-- test_parser.py     Live Gmail parsing demonstration/smoke script
    |-- test_cleaner.py    Live Gmail parsing and cleaning demonstration
    |-- database/          Currently empty; persistence is not implemented
    |-- ml/
        |-- __init__.py
        |-- parser.py      Gmail payload normalization and MIME body extraction
        |-- cleaner.py     Text normalization and sender decomposition
        |-- features.py    Currently empty; feature engineering is planned
        |-- models/        Currently empty; trained models are planned

The .gitignore excludes OAuth files, virtual environments, Python cache files,
and local database files. This is important because authentication tokens and
local databases can contain private user information.


3. Architecture and responsibilities
-------------------------------------

3.1 Authentication: src/auth.py

The module defines a read-only Gmail scope:

    https://www.googleapis.com/auth/gmail.readonly

Using the narrowest practical scope follows the principle of least privilege:
the application can read mail but cannot send, delete, label, or modify it.

Path handling uses pathlib.Path. BASE_DIR is calculated from the location of
auth.py, so credentials are found relative to the project root rather than the
process's current working directory. This makes launching the program from a
different directory more reliable.

get_credentials() follows this sequence:

1. Start with no credentials in memory.
2. If token.json exists, deserialize the authorized-user credentials.
3. If the credentials are expired and have a refresh token, refresh them using
   google.auth.transport.requests.Request.
4. If credentials are missing or invalid, load the OAuth client configuration
   from credentials.json and run InstalledAppFlow.run_local_server().
5. Persist the newly authorized credentials as token.json.
6. Return the Credentials object.

Important OAuth concepts:

- Authentication answers who the user is.
- Authorization answers what the application may access.
- An access token is short-lived and is sent to APIs.
- A refresh token allows the application to obtain a new access token without
  asking the user to log in again.
- OAuth consent is delegated access; the application does not receive the
  user's Gmail password.
- The local-server flow opens a browser and receives the OAuth redirect on a
  temporary local port.

The current implementation refreshes an expired token in memory but does not
explicitly rewrite the refreshed token to token.json. A production version
should persist refreshed credentials when needed and should handle missing or
invalid credential files with user-friendly errors.

3.2 Gmail client construction: src/gmail_client.py

get_gmail_service() is a factory function. It obtains credentials and passes
them to googleapiclient.discovery.build with serviceName="gmail" and
version="v1". The returned object is a Google API resource client.

This separation keeps OAuth details out of the service class. It also makes a
future dependency-injection design possible: tests could pass a fake service
instead of performing real network calls.

3.3 Gmail operations: src/gmail_service.py

GmailService owns the authenticated API resource and exposes three operations:

- list_recent_messages(max_results=10): calls users.messages.list for the
  special userId "me" and returns message summary objects, normally including
  message IDs and thread IDs.
- get_message(message_id): calls users.messages.get with format="full" so the
  application receives headers, MIME structure, body data, labels, and other
  message metadata.
- get_header(message, header_name): performs a case-insensitive search through
  payload headers and returns the matching value or an empty string.

The service is a thin wrapper, not a complete repository. It currently does
not paginate results, filter by query, retry transient API errors, control
rate limits, or cache messages. It also fetches each full message separately,
which is simple but can result in an N+1 request pattern.

The "me" user ID is a Gmail API convention meaning the authenticated account.
This avoids hard-coding an email address.

3.4 Entry point: src/main.py

main() creates GmailService, requests the default number of recent messages,
prints the count, fetches each message by ID, extracts its Subject header, and
prints a numbered list. The if __name__ == "__main__" guard ensures main runs
when the file is executed directly but not merely when it is imported.

The commented authentication-only block is an earlier diagnostic milestone.
It is useful history, but it is not part of the current runtime path.


4. Gmail message and MIME concepts
-----------------------------------
Gmail does not return a message body as one guaranteed plain-text field. The
message is represented as a payload tree based on MIME, the standard format
used to describe email content and attachments.

Common MIME situations:

- text/plain: readable plain text body
- text/html: HTML body requiring tag removal before classification
- multipart/alternative: usually contains both plain-text and HTML versions
- multipart/mixed: may contain a body plus attachments
- nested multipart parts: a tree can contain more trees
- filename on a part: a useful signal that an attachment exists

Base64url encoding

Gmail body data is commonly base64url encoded. ml/parser.py adds the required
padding, decodes with base64.urlsafe_b64decode, and converts bytes to UTF-8.
errors="ignore" prevents a malformed byte sequence from crashing parsing, but
it can silently discard characters. A production implementation would record
that decoding issue and consider a more explicit fallback strategy.

The recursive parser walks payload parts. For a text/plain or text/html payload
it decodes the body. HTML is passed through BeautifulSoup with the built-in
html.parser and converted to text with spaces between elements. For a
multipart payload it recursively checks child parts and returns the first
non-empty body it finds.

This first-non-empty policy is easy to understand, but it is a heuristic. A
stronger implementation would prefer text/plain over text/html when both are
available, collect all suitable body parts, avoid quoted reply history when
appropriate, and separately track attachment metadata.


5. Parsing: src/ml/parser.py
----------------------------
parse_gmail_message(msg) converts an API response into a stable dictionary:

    id
    thread_id
    from
    to
    cc
    subject
    date
    snippet
    label_ids
    has_attachment
    body

Headers are normalized into a dictionary with lowercase keys. This avoids
depending on whether Gmail spells a header as Subject, subject, or another
case. The returned shape is useful because later code does not need to know
the details of Gmail's response format.

The parser uses .get() in many places to tolerate absent optional fields. This
is defensive parsing: external API payloads should not be assumed to be
complete. One exception is GmailService.get_header(), which indexes
message["payload"]["headers"] directly and can raise KeyError for an unusual
or malformed message. Aligning both paths around safe access would improve
robustness.

Attachment detection is recursive. It returns true when the current payload or
any descendant has a filename. It does not download attachments, inspect their
content, or distinguish inline images from user documents.


6. Cleaning and normalization: src/ml/cleaner.py
------------------------------------------------
clean_text(text) prepares body text for search or machine learning while
preserving semantic placeholders.

Its current transformations are:

1. Return an empty string for empty input.
2. Remove HTML conditional comments.
3. Remove remaining HTML tags.
4. Replace URLs with the token URL.
5. Replace email addresses with the token EMAIL.
6. Replace phone-like values with the token PHONE.
7. Replace currency values beginning with $, INR, euro, or pound symbols with
   the token MONEY.
8. Decode two common HTML entities.
9. Lowercase the text.
10. Collapse whitespace and trim the result.

Replacing values instead of deleting them preserves category information. For
example, an invoice containing a money amount still signals that money was
present without forcing a model to memorize every amount. It also reduces
high-cardinality and potentially sensitive data.

Regex tradeoffs are worth discussing in an interview. The URL, email, phone,
and money patterns are practical heuristics, not complete parsers. They can
miss international formats or replace text incorrectly. The phone expression
can also match some non-phone numeric strings. A production system would test
these patterns against representative mail and document the expected behavior.

clean_subject(subject) removes repeated reply and forward prefixes such as
Re:, Fw:, and Fwd:, then sends the subject through clean_text. This makes
subjects from the same conversation more comparable.

extract_sender_parts(sender) handles either a display-name form such as
"Example Team <team@example.com>" or a bare address. It returns:

    sender_name
    sender_email
    sender_domain

The domain is lowercased and extracted after the first @. This can support
features such as sender-domain frequency or organization-level grouping.
The current parser does not decode encoded display names or validate email
syntax, so those are possible future improvements.


7. Machine-learning readiness
-----------------------------
The project is ML-ready in the sense that it has a normalized email record and
deterministic cleaning functions. It does not yet contain a trained classifier.
ml/features.py and ml/models/ are currently empty.

A sensible future feature pipeline could combine:

- TF-IDF features from cleaned subject and body
- sender domain and sender frequency
- message labels and thread information
- attachment presence
- body and subject length
- URL, email, phone, and money placeholder counts
- time or day features derived from the Date header
- optional user-provided labels as training targets

Possible baseline models from scikit-learn include logistic regression, linear
SVM, or multinomial naive Bayes for categories such as work, promotions,
personal, receipts, or newsletters. Start with a transparent baseline before
trying a more complex model.

Typical supervised-learning workflow:

1. Collect messages with consent and define stable category labels.
2. Split data into train, validation, and test sets without leaking related
   messages across sets where possible.
3. Fit text vectorization only on training data.
4. Train a baseline classifier.
5. Evaluate precision, recall, F1, and a confusion matrix per class.
6. Inspect false positives and false negatives.
7. Serialize the fitted pipeline with a version and preprocessing metadata.
8. Run inference on newly parsed and cleaned messages.
9. Capture corrections for later retraining.

Data leakage is a key interview topic. Fitting a TF-IDF vectorizer or choosing
thresholds using the test set makes evaluation optimistic. Thread-level or
time-based splitting may better model production behavior than random row
splitting because nearby messages are correlated.

Privacy is equally important. Email is sensitive data. A production design
should minimize retention, protect stored content, restrict logs, encrypt
local data, provide deletion controls, and avoid sending message content to an
external model without explicit consent.


8. Database and persistence roadmap
-----------------------------------
The database directory is empty and .gitignore excludes local database files,
so there is currently no persistence implementation.

A future schema might contain:

- emails: Gmail message ID, thread ID, sender fields, subject, date, snippet,
  body hash, cleaned text, attachment flag, and timestamps
- labels or categories: category name and model version
- predictions: email ID, predicted category, confidence, and model version
- user_feedback: corrected category and correction timestamp

Use Gmail message ID as an idempotency key. Fetching the same message again
should update or skip the existing record rather than create duplicates. A
body hash can help detect changes without storing duplicate content.

SQLite is a reasonable local starting point. A larger deployment may use a
server database, but the privacy and access-control design must grow with it.


9. Testing and current verification
------------------------------------
test_parser.py and test_cleaner.py are named as tests, but they currently run
real Gmail calls at import/execution time and print diagnostic output. They are
better described as manual integration or smoke scripts.

Current demonstrations include:

- inspecting a message's date, MIME type, and number of parts
- printing the MIME tree and decoded body parts
- parsing one live message
- cleaning its body and subject
- extracting sender components

They require valid OAuth files, network access, and at least one available
message. They are not deterministic unit tests and should not be run in CI as
written.

Recommended unit tests should use fixture dictionaries and avoid Gmail:

- plain text payload decodes correctly
- HTML payload becomes readable text
- nested multipart payload is traversed
- missing body data returns an empty string
- malformed base64 does not crash the parser
- attachments are detected recursively
- mixed-case headers are normalized
- repeated Re:/Fwd: prefixes are removed
- URLs, addresses, phones, and money values become placeholders
- sender display names and bare addresses are parsed correctly
- empty and unusual inputs are handled safely

Recommended integration tests should isolate network access, use a fake Gmail
service or mocked google API resource, and test pagination, authentication
failure, rate limiting, and API error handling separately.


10. Running the current project
-------------------------------
From the project root, create or activate a virtual environment and install:

    python -m venv .venv
    .venv\Scripts\activate
    pip install -r requirements.txt

Google Cloud setup is required before the first run:

1. Create or select a Google Cloud project.
2. Enable the Gmail API.
3. Configure the OAuth consent screen.
4. Create an OAuth client suitable for a desktop application.
5. Place the downloaded client configuration at the project root as
   credentials.json.
6. Run from src so the current absolute imports resolve:

       cd src
       python main.py

The first run opens a browser for consent and writes token.json. Later runs
reuse or refresh the saved token. The current imports are simple module-level
imports such as "from gmail_service import GmailService", so running from the
src directory is the least surprising invocation. A package layout with
relative imports or an installed console entry point would make root-level
execution cleaner.

The live demo prints subjects only. Parser and cleaner scripts print more
diagnostic information and require a real message. Never commit credentials or
tokens and never include full email bodies in shared logs.


11. Likely interview questions and strong answers
--------------------------------------------------

Q: Explain the architecture in one minute.
A: The application has a small layered design. auth.py owns Gmail OAuth and
   token reuse. gmail_client.py builds the authenticated Gmail API client.
   gmail_service.py wraps message listing, retrieval, and header access.
   parser.py converts Gmail's nested MIME payload into a stable email record.
   cleaner.py normalizes text and extracts sender attributes for a future ML
   pipeline. main.py currently demonstrates retrieval by printing subjects.

Q: Why use a read-only OAuth scope?
A: The current feature only reads messages, so gmail.readonly follows least
   privilege and limits the impact of a compromised token. Broader scopes
   should be added only when a concrete feature requires them.

Q: What happens when the access token expires?
A: If a saved credential has a refresh token, get_credentials refreshes it.
   Otherwise the code starts the installed-app OAuth flow again. I would also
   persist refreshed credentials and add explicit error handling around refresh.

Q: Why is Gmail message parsing recursive?
A: MIME messages are trees. Multipart containers can contain text bodies,
   nested multiparts, and attachments at different levels, so recursion is a
   natural way to inspect every descendant.

Q: Why clean URLs and email addresses instead of deleting them?
A: Their presence can be predictive, but exact values are high-cardinality and
   may expose private information. Placeholder tokens preserve semantic signal
   while reducing noise and memorization.

Q: What is the biggest performance issue in the current demo?
A: It first lists messages and then calls get for every message, creating one
   additional API request per message. I would add pagination, bounded batch
   processing, retry/backoff, and caching or incremental synchronization.

Q: What would you test first?
A: Pure parser and cleaner unit tests using fixed payload fixtures. They are
   fast, deterministic, and cover the most complex local logic without OAuth or
   network dependencies.

Q: What is missing before calling this a complete mail manager?
A: Persistence, feature extraction, model training/inference, user feedback,
   synchronization state, pagination, error handling, structured logging, and
   a user-facing action such as categorization or reporting. The current code
   is the ingestion and preprocessing foundation.

Q: How would you prevent duplicate processing?
A: Store the Gmail message ID as a unique key, track history or a sync cursor,
   and make processing idempotent. A stored content hash and model version can
   determine whether reprocessing is necessary.

Q: How would you evaluate an email classifier?
A: Use a held-out, leakage-resistant test set and report per-class precision,
   recall, F1, and a confusion matrix. For user-facing automation, confidence
   thresholds and the cost of incorrect actions matter more than accuracy alone.

Q: What security risks do you see?
A: OAuth tokens and email content are sensitive. The app should use least
   privilege, protect file permissions, keep secrets out of source control,
   minimize retention, redact logs, validate external data, and define how
   users revoke access and delete stored content.


12. Strengths and limitations to discuss honestly
--------------------------------------------------
Strengths:

- Clear separation between authentication, API access, parsing, and cleaning.
- Read-only Gmail permission is appropriately narrow for the current scope.
- pathlib makes credential paths independent of the launch directory.
- Recursive MIME traversal handles nested message structures.
- Defensive .get() access in the parser tolerates missing API fields.
- Cleaning preserves useful semantic categories with explicit placeholders.
- Pinned dependencies make the environment more reproducible.

Limitations:

- No persistence, classifier, feature engineering, or model artifacts yet.
- No pagination or Gmail query support.
- Full-message retrieval can create many API calls.
- Network, OAuth, and API errors are not handled with application-level
  messages or retry policies.
- Refreshed credentials are not explicitly persisted.
- get_header() assumes payload and headers are present.
- MIME selection returns the first non-empty part rather than preferring a
  well-defined representation.
- Demo scripts depend on live mail and are not isolated automated tests.
- Imports assume execution from the src directory.
- Sensitive values may be printed by the diagnostic scripts.


13. Practical implementation roadmap
-------------------------------------
Phase 1: Make ingestion reliable

- Convert src into a proper Python package or add a console entry point.
- Add structured configuration and clear startup validation.
- Add pagination and Gmail query support.
- Implement retries with exponential backoff for transient failures.
- Persist refreshed OAuth credentials.
- Add deterministic parser and cleaner unit tests with fixtures.

Phase 2: Add persistence and synchronization

- Create a SQLite schema and unique Gmail message key.
- Store sync state and process only new or changed messages.
- Avoid storing raw bodies unless required; encrypt or minimize retained data.
- Add safe logging and error records.

Phase 3: Add ML classification

- Implement feature extraction and a scikit-learn Pipeline.
- Add labeled data collection and a reproducible training command.
- Save model, vectorizer, category mapping, and preprocessing version together.
- Add confidence thresholds and an uncertain/manual-review category.
- Measure per-class quality and monitor drift.

Phase 4: Add product behavior

- Present categories and confidence to the user.
- Capture corrections as feedback.
- Add optional Gmail label actions only after obtaining the minimum required
  write scope and explicit user consent.
- Add account disconnect and data deletion flows.


14. Final interview framing
---------------------------
Describe the project as an incremental email-intelligence system. The current
milestone proves the most foundational integration: secure read-only access to
Gmail, retrieval of real messages, MIME-aware parsing, and privacy-conscious
text preprocessing. The architecture deliberately leaves clear extension
points for persistence, features, and models.

The strongest answer is precise about boundaries: do not claim that the
repository already classifies or organizes mail automatically. Instead, explain
how the normalized and cleaned representation makes those capabilities
straightforward to add, which engineering risks must be addressed, and how you
would validate each next step.
